JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
efforts to pass health
care reform ran into
even more roadblocks
this evening.
A group of key senators
balked at voting for
what some have called the
last resort, a version
labeled skinny repeal.
This came as plans were
laid for debate and maybe
a final vote later tonight.
Our Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: A long day
of debate setting up a longer
night of votes, with Republicans
stressing the
failures of Obamacare.
SEN.
LAMAR ALEXANDER (R),
Tennessee: Conditions
have changed in Tennessee.
Our insurance market is --
quote -- "very near collapse."
That means that up to 350,000
individuals in our state,
songwriters, workers, farmers,
who buy their insurance on
individual market are sitting
there worrying in July and in
August whether they
will have any option to
buy insurance in 2018.
LISA DESJARDINS: And Democrats
insisting that Republicans'
plans could mean no choices,
especially for the poor.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont:
Where there is a serious
disagreement is, we say that the
children of this country who
have serious illnesses have
the freedom to stay alive,
even if their parents do
not have a lot of money.
LISA DESJARDINS: The debate
all leading lead up to a
whirlwind called vote-a-rama.
Senators will take up amendment
after amendment with little
debate and five-minute votes.
All or nearly all
are expected to fail.
Then, at the end of the
legislative marathon,
comes the key moment.
Republicans plan to propose the
one idea they think could pass
now: a stripped-down, minimal
repeal.
It would abolish Obamacare's
individual and employer
mandates, as well as
one tax on medical
devices.
It would leave Medicaid and much
of the rest of the Affordable
Care Act essentially unchanged.
Some on Capitol Hill call
it the skinny repeal,
but the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office
found it would mean 15
million fewer Americans
with health insurance.
And there is another issue:
The CBO also found the idea
would save $78 billion.
But to comply with special rules
that Republicans are using,
this plan would need to save at
least $133 billion, the score
for the original House bill.
As the votes stack up, so has
more White House pushback at
Alaska Senator Lisa Murkowski,
who voted against
starting debate.
First reported by Alaska
Dispatch News, Murkowski,
along with fellow Alaskan
Senator Dan Sullivan,
received grave phone calls
from President Trump's
Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke.
He warned that the no vote
put Alaska's future with the
administration in jeopardy.
The paper speculated
jeopardy meant problems for
Alaska's energy concerns.
Murkowski is
standing her ground.
SEN.
LISA MURKOWSKI (R), Alaska:
I'm a pretty strong and
independent individual.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meantime, as
to the endgame, Republicans
admit, if they pass a bill, it
would be a placeholder to
negotiate with the House.
SEN.
LAMAR ALEXANDER: It is not
a solution to Affordable
Care Act problems.
But is its a solution
to how we get to a place
where we can write a
solution to the Affordable
Care Act problems.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meantime,
Democrats predict a last-minute
bill would backfire.
SEN.
PATTY MURRAY (D), Washington:
If they jam it through, they
will be held accountable
for the millions of people
who lose care and the millions
and millions more who will see
their premiums go up.
LISA DESJARDINS: Everyone
on both sides is looking
at a long night.
SEN.
JOHN KENNEDY (R), Louisiana:
You can sleep out in the
hall in between votes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, late
today, what we were suggesting
as we introduced your piece
is you had a group of
Republicans coming out
and saying they're not
even prepared to vote
for this so-called skinny
repeal, which many had thought
was going to be the last resort.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is a late
and rather potentially pivotal
twist led by Senator Lindsey
Graham of South Carolina.
Also, John McCain was
standing there, as well as
Ron Johnson of Wisconsin.
All three of those senators
said they will not vote for
that so-called skinny repeal
or that smaller repeal bill
unless they are guaranteed
that that is not the end, that
they are guaranteed that
the chance to debate a
larger bill what's called
conference committee
with the House.
And that's critical.
That means that we won't see the
health care end -- the health
care debate end this weekend,
as some people were
starting to talk about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa, how did
they get to the point where
right here at the -- beyond the
11th hour, you still
have Republican senators
saying they're not
comfortable with the options
they're being offered?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think
there is a graduate-level
class and probably
several in the works that
will look at that
exact question, Judy.
But, from my viewpoint, one of
the issues here was that they
didn't go through the usual
process.
They didn't go
through committees.
They didn't have
public discussion.
They did not have
drafts of this bill.
And, in fact, Judy, as I talk
to you right now, there is
still no draft of what could
be the final proposal
before senators.
I talked to Ron Johnson, who
said he wants to improve this
bill, along with those other
senators, to give more money
to states in block grants.
I said, when will your
amendment be drafted?
He said, "We can't draft
it now because we don't
know what we're amending."
So, I think the process itself
has led to these large questions
here near the very end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When are the
arguments, Lisa, that are mainly
being used by the Republican
leadership, and for that
matter by the White House?
Do they have any presence
as this moves closer to an
attempt to pass something?
LISA DESJARDINS: Vice
President Pence has certainly
been an important factor.
He was here today speaking
to small business owners.
I have not seen him on
the Senate side today,
but I understand he
has been making phone
calls.
But I think the basic gist of
this, Judy, is rather simple.
Republican leaders in the
Senate seem to be saying,
vote for this or nothing.
This is your one shot.
Initially, they were
saying, we will add to it,
we will improve it later.
But late today, they seemed
to be saying, we actually
could pass this with the House
this weekend.
And that's another important
development to watch, Judy.
The House has now signaled to
its members that they should
be ready to stay this weekend,
and they are preparing a rule
that would allow them to pass
anything, including a health
care bill, same day.
So if the Senate passes
something, the House could
pass it very quickly.
But just like on the Senate,
it's not clear that the House
Republican Conference supports
any one vehicle.
Very complicated, and right
now, it seems the last hour has
not worked to the leadership's
advantage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, as we sit
here or stand here, or you stand
there, Lisa, as the evening
gets under way, you're saying
this is truly up in the air?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
It is.
And I think it will
be a long night.
And that vote-a-rama that
we explained, right now, the
timing of that is on hold.
I know this, Judy.
A lot of people
have ordered pizza.
I have brought my toothbrush.
My husband doesn't know that
yet, but I think we just don't
know what's going to happen,
but it will be an
important next 24 hours.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Toothbrush
better than pizza.
Lisa, thank you.
And good luck
staying up all night.
LISA DESJARDINS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
have heard, we keep talking
about so-called skinny repeal.
Let's look at exactly
what that means.
And, for that, we
bring in Sarah Kliff.
She is a senior policy
correspondent for
the Web site Vox.
She has written
extensively on health care.
Welcome back to the program.
SARAH KLIFF, Vox: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah, so we
are throwing around this term.
As we heard from Lisa, there
are senators who are saying
even this may not be acceptable
to them.
But for purposes of
conversation, it is
going to be one of the
measures, we think, on the
table.
What does it mean?
SARAH KLIFF: So, it basically
means repealing the individual
mandate, this requirement to
purchase health coverage.
We have seen other parts come
in, come out, the medical
device tax, defunding Planned
Parenthood, but, at the
core, it's the repeal
of the requirement to
purchase health coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, it's
rolling back some of Obamacare,
some of the Affordable Care
Act, but not as much as
full-blown repeal would be?
SARAH KLIFF: It's certainly
not as much, so compared to
the other bills, the one that
passed through the House, for
example, the American Health
Care Act, which would get
rid of much more in the health
care law, the essential health
benefits, for example, this
is smaller, but it would
affect a lot of people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and that's
what I want to ask you about,
because you wrote a piece
for Vox today which was
titled "Skinny Repeal
Isn't Skinny at All."
SARAH KLIFF: Yes, this is
a bill would cause about 15
million people to lose coverage.
So, I kind of say skinny repeal
is a misnomer, that this would
really change the individual
market.
The Medicaid expansion, that
would mostly function the same,
but for people who purchase
coverage in the individual
market, they could expect
premium increases of 20 percent.
A lot of people would
drop out of the market.
I don't think most
Americans would see that
as a skinny, small change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the
things you were writing about
is the integral role that the
individual mandate
plays in all this.
Remind us why that
matters so much.
SARAH KLIFF: That's a
requirement that nearly
all of us in the United
States have to purchase
health insurance.
And the draft version of the
Affordable Care Act, they
knew that was unpopular.
They included it because
they needed a way to
get healthy people into
the insurance market.
If you don't have mandate,
the fear is that only the sick
people who really need coverage
sign up, premiums get really
high, you could enter a death
spiral, where premiums just
go higher and higher.
So, even Republican senators
agree on this point, that
the mandate, it is what makes
the market work.
It gets the healthy
people to sign up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that explains
the number you gave at the
beginning of our conversation,
the 15 million.
The larger repeal would
have meant 24, 25 million
people losing coverage.
But you're saying even
this is 15, 16 million.
SARAH KLIFF: Yes, the big
difference is Medicaid.
So, those other bills,
they would have ended
Medicaid expansion,
would have had much, much
more significant
Medicaid losses.
And there are actually some
Medicaid losses associated with
individual mandate repeals.
The CBO thinks that, if
there isn't a mandate,
if people don't hear this
message health insurance
is mandatory in the United
States, they might not
sign up for Medicaid.
But the real challenge here
is in the individual markets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it does
sound like, with this, as we
said, late-day news conference,
Senator Lindsey Graham, other
Republicans coming out and
saying, we're not prepared
to support this unless we know
the House is going to work
with us on this, indicates that
they're getting some
of this message.
SARAH KLIFF: Yes,
they understand.
Lindsey Graham was saying, you
know, in his press conference,
we don't think this is good
policy.
We don't think it's good to
take the individual mandate
out of the marketplace.
So they recognize
these consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah Kliff
with Vox watching it all very
closely, thank you so much.
SARAH KLIFF: Thank you.